RESEARCH REQUEST: CAN A COMMON-POOL RESOURCE HAVE A GRADED SCARCITY REGIME,
AND HOW IS A MEASUREMENT POINT CHOSEN WITHOUT TUNING TO THE OUTCOME

Date: 2026-08-14


0. HOW TO READ THIS REQUEST

What we need:
(a) a check of a short piece of mathematics we did ourselves,
(b) established mechanisms from bioeconomics, resource ecology or
    agent-based modelling that produce a regime we cannot produce,
(c) established methodology for choosing WHEN to measure and WHAT parameter
    value to run at, when both choices could be accused of being fitted to
    the result.

What we do NOT need:
- Our project history. You have no access to it.
- A prediction of what our setup will produce. Choosing a design by
  anticipating its effect is post-hoc.
- Code. We write the implementation ourselves.

SOURCE DISCIPLINE - OUR RECORD IS POOR AND WE NOW KNOW WHY

Across seven previous requests we hit two distinct failure modes.

Failure mode 1, wrong identity. Nine citations turned out to be
misattributed: DOIs pointing at a different paper, a journal ISSN used as a
"source", an invented author list attached to a real arXiv number, and one
dead DOI.

Failure mode 2, right source but wrong claim. The sources were real and the
DOIs resolved, but the claim was not in them. Verifying the DOI does NOT
catch this.

So from the last round we additionally ask WHERE in the source each claim
appears. That change worked: we could finally place each claim next to its
own quotation, and three of six claims turned out to say something their own
quotation did not. Two refinements this round:

1. Give a bibliography. Last time the answer used internal reference numbers
   such as [56] and [58] with no bibliography attached, so one claim could
   not be traced to any paper at all and was discarded.

2. Quote verbatim, and do not give line numbers. Last time "lines 249-253"
   pointed at nothing; the same sentence sat at line 313 of our own
   extraction. Line numbers do not survive between copies of a document. The
   verbatim quotation is what made verification possible. Section name plus
   a short quotation, please.

This is not an accusation. We made the same class of error ourselves: in one
of our own local scans we wrote the wrong DOI for a sampling paper, opened
it, found a different article, and corrected it.

We open every DOI and arXiv identifier through Crossref, and we do not use a
claim whose location cannot be shown.


1. THE SYSTEM

A population of software agents shares one renewable resource pool. Time is
event-ordered: an integer counter, no wall clock. At each event every agent
announces an action, and a deterministic mapping (no LLM judge) turns that
action into a harvest quantity.

1.1 THE POOL

Logistic renewal, then harvest, then clamp:

    regenerated_t = P_t + r * P_t * (1 - P_t / K)
    granted_t     = allocation_rule( regenerated_t , demands )
    P_next        = clamp( regenerated_t - sum of granted , 0 , K )

Per-agent values:

    r    = 0.15     renewal rate per event
    K    = 100.0    carrying capacity, per agent (see 1.4)
    P_0  = 80.0     initial stock, equal to 0.8 * K
    d    = 8.0      harvest demanded by the dominant action

Other actions demand 2.0, 1.0 or 0.0, but 94 to 100 percent of all observed
events take the 8.0 action (measured in our own pilot), so the analysis in
section 2 treats demand as 8.0 per agent per event.

The allocation rule is currently proportional sharing of any shortfall. We
are considering replacing it with sequential access in a rotating order.
That design question is what started this request.

1.2 THE HARVEST-TO-ENERGY LINK

    gain(x) = G_max * x / (H + x),  with G_max = 0.50 and H = 2.0

Concave and saturating, deliberately: a proportional link would leave
over-extraction strictly dominant. The input is the realized harvest, never
the announced amount, so an empty pool feeds nobody. Energy also falls each
event by a fixed metabolic cost, and when it reaches zero the agent's life
ends.

1.3 THE MEASUREMENT POINT

The primary endpoint is read at a fixed event ordinal L = 10, identical for
every lineage. L is not free. Death is suspended for the first 10 events (a
birth-transient grace window), and L is anchored to the end of that window
precisely so that every lineage reaches the measurement point and nothing is
censored. Observed lifespans are 11 to 20 events.

1.4 POPULATION

We are moving from a single lineage to N agents: tens of individuals,
single-digit numbers of generations. We intend to scale K and P_0 linearly
with N, holding the per-agent numbers above fixed.

1.5 CONSTRAINTS WE CANNOT RELAX

- No trait injection. No personality or tendency value may be assigned to an
  agent. Every difference must arise from what the agent lived. This is an
  axiom of the project.
- No behavioural priors. We may not instruct agents toward any decision
  rule, and we may not intervene to fix the observed over-extraction. The
  collapse is reported as a finding, not corrected.
- No LLM judge. All metrics are deterministic Python.
- Reproducibility is enforced by a gate: the same seed with the same code
  must produce the same result. NOTE: this does not mean one seed. We run
  many independent seeds; the last confirmatory run used 40 of them. A
  previous answer misread this constraint, so please do not repeat that
  reading.
- Event-ordered time only. No wall clock.

If a proposal violates one of these, still give it, but mark which one.
Knowing the price of relaxing a constraint is better than not seeing the
option at all.


2. THE MATHEMATICS WE DID - PLEASE CHECK IT

We need heterogeneity between agents to arise from competition for a
depleting resource. That requires a scarcity regime: a stretch of events in
which the pool cannot satisfy everyone but is not yet dead, so that who
harvests first matters repeatedly. We derived that no such stretch exists.
Please verify or refute each step.

(a) Maximum sustainable yield. For the logistic map above, renewal is
    maximised at P = K/2 and equals r*K/4 = 3.75 per agent per event. Demand
    is 8.0. Demand exceeds maximum renewal by a factor of 2.13.

(b) Sustainability threshold. Setting r*P*(1 - P/K) = d gives
    P = (K/2) * (1 +/- sqrt(1 - 4d/(r*K))). Real roots exist if and only if
    K >= 4d/r = 213.33 per agent. Therefore:
      - K below 213.33: no equilibrium, the stock declines monotonically to
        zero.
      - K above 213.33: two equilibria, the upper one stable and the lower
        one unstable. Starting from 0.8*K the stock converges to the upper
        stable level and stays there.

(c) The consequence we cannot get around. Below the threshold the pool
    collapses; above it, scarcity never occurs at all. Neither region
    contains a graded scarcity regime.

(d) Zero is absorbing. Logistic growth from P = 0 is 0. In the single event
    where demand first exceeds availability, the agents jointly take
    everything available, whatever the allocation rule, so the pool is
    emptied in that same event and never recovers.

(e) Therefore there is exactly one partially satisfied event per life,
    whatever the initial stock. Changing P_0 or K only moves WHEN that event
    happens, not how long it lasts. Worked values, with P_0 = 0.8*K, giving
    the ordinal of the single partial event:

        K per agent  =  40   50   60   67   70   80   100
        partial event at 5    7    8    9   10   12    17

    With today's K = 100 the single partial event falls at ordinal 17, that
    is AFTER the measurement point L = 10, so at the moment we measure, all
    agents are still identical by construction.

(f) The bind. L = 10 cannot move later without losing the no-censoring
    guarantee described in 1.3. The scarcity event cannot be made to last
    longer, by (d). So the only remaining lever is K, and choosing K = 67
    because it puts the scarcity event at ordinal 9 is uncomfortably close
    to selecting a constant so that the measurement lands where the
    mechanism fires.


3. QUESTIONS

QUESTION 1. Is section 2 correct, and is there a parameter region we have
missed?

Check steps (a) through (e). Specifically:
- Is the threshold K >= 4d/r the standard bioeconomic result, and under what
  name?
- Near-critical slowing: if demand is set just barely above maximum renewal,
  does the stock spend many events crawling through the bottleneck near
  P = K/2, the delay associated with a saddle-node or fold, producing in
  effect a long graded regime? If so, how many events, how does that scale
  with the excess d - r*K/4, and how fragile is it to perturbation?
- Does the discrete-time formulation change any of this relative to the
  continuous-time one?

QUESTION 2. What produces graded scarcity WITHOUT changing agent behaviour?

Our harvest is a fixed quantity, independent of stock. We suspect this is
what makes collapse a cliff rather than a slope.
- In fisheries and resource ecology, what are the standard alternatives:
  stock-proportional catch, Holling-type functional responses, escapement or
  refuge rules, stock-dependent search efficiency?
- For each: does it produce a PROLONGED interval of partial satisfaction,
  and has that been MEASURED, by simulation or empirically, rather than
  asserted?
- Which of these can be stated as a property of the ENVIRONMENT rather than
  of the agent's decision rule? That distinction decides whether we may use
  it at all, given the no-behavioural-priors constraint in 1.5.

QUESTION 3. Measuring at a fixed age when the mechanism turns on later.

We measure every lineage at the same ordinal so that arms are comparable and
nothing is censored by death. But the mechanism of interest may not have
engaged by then.
- How is this handled in experimental evolution and life-history studies:
  fixed-age measurement versus measurement at a fixed physiological state or
  event, and what is the accepted vocabulary for each?
- If measuring later means some individuals have died, what is the standard
  treatment when that death is INFORMATIVE, that is, correlated with the
  very quantity being measured?
- Is there a defensible way to hold a fixed-age endpoint AND capture a
  mechanism that engages after it, for example a fixed-age primary endpoint
  plus a post-onset rate as a declared secondary?

QUESTION 4. Choosing a parameter so a mechanism is in range, without it
being tuning.

We would set K so that scarcity occurs inside the observation window. The
value would be derived from an inequality over constants declared before any
run, with no data entering, but it is still chosen so that the mechanism
fires.
- Is there an accepted term and practice for this: operating point
  selection, design for detectability, manipulation check, positive control?
- Where do reporting guidelines draw the line between "parameter set so the
  mechanism is active" and "parameter fitted to the outcome"?
- Are there worked examples of a pre-registration or a simulation-study
  protocol that declares such a choice explicitly, and how is it justified
  in the text?

QUESTION 5. How many competition events does a selection estimate need?

If differentiation arises only in a small number of events, we want to know
the floor.
- For a selection differential expressed as a covariance between relative
  reproductive success and a trait, in the Price equation form, what is
  known about estimability and bias at small population size and few
  episodes of selection?
- Is there measured guidance on the minimum number of selection episodes
  before such an estimate is interpretable?
- We are NOT asking what effect size we will get. We are asking what makes
  the estimate defined rather than degenerate.


4. FORMAT OF THE ANSWER

For every claim, five things:

1. What is claimed. One sentence.
2. Source. Author, year, DOI or arXiv identifier. If unsure, write
   "identity not verified".
3. Where in the source. Section name, figure or table number, AND a short
   verbatim quotation. Do NOT give line numbers, they do not survive between
   copies. If you cannot locate it, write "cannot show where this appears in
   the source". We will not use a claim without this.
4. Type of evidence. Measured experiment, simulation, or theoretical
   proposal.
5. Applicability to our setup. Which assumption does it break?

Attach a bibliography mapping every reference marker you use to a full
citation. Last round an internal marker with no bibliography entry cost us
an entire claim.

If a proposal violates one of the constraints in section 1.5, still give it
and mark which one.

If anything in section 2 is wrong, say so plainly and show the correction.
In previous rounds the single most valuable line we received was the one
that refuted an assumption of ours. A clean "your derivation is right and
there is no way around it" is also a usable answer: it tells us the
constraint is structural rather than a gap in our reading.


5. DELIBERATELY OUT OF SCOPE

- Where between-agent heterogeneity comes from in general. Answered in a
  previous round.
- Arm contamination and isolation of a shared pool. Answered.
- Endpoint definition and censoring in the general case. Answered.
- Fixing the agents' over-extraction. Closed by axiom.
- Learning rate, model choice, quantization. Measured and frozen.
